Improved installation guide (#1679)
PrestaShop/docs: basics/installation/_index.md

---
title: Installation
menuTitle: Installation
weight: 15
mostViewedPage: true
useMermaid: true
showOnHomepage: true
aliases: 
    - /8/basics/installation/locahost
---

# Installing PrestaShop locally for development or testing

> If you want to develop or experiment on PrestaShop, you should install it locally on your machine. The main advantage is that it makes it possible for you to entirely bypass the process of uploading your file on your online server in order to test it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to develop or experiment with PrestaShop, you should install it locally on your machine. The main advantage is that it makes it possible for you to entirely bypass the process of uploading your files to your online server in order to test it. 
```

> Another advantage is that a local test environment enables you to test code without the risk of breaking your production store. Having a local environment is the essential first step in the path of web development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another advantage is that a local test environment enables you to test code without risking breaking your production store. Having a local environment is the essential first step in the path of web development.
```

> Installing any web-application locally requires that you first install the adequate environment, namely the Apache web server, the PHP language interpreter, the MySQL database server, and ideally a MySQL admin tool such as phpMyAdmin tool. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Installing any web application locally requires installing an adequate environment, namely the Apache web server, the PHP language interpreter, the MySQL database server, and ideally, a MySQL admin tool such as the phpMyAdmin tool. 
```

> This is called an *AMP stack: Apache+MySQL+PHP and the operating system, giving WAMP (Windows+Apache+MySQL+PHP), MAMP (macOS…) and LAMP (Linux+…). Since all of the items packaged are open-source, these installers are most of the time free.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is called an *AMP stack: Apache+MySQL+PHP and the operating system, giving WAMP (Windows+Apache+MySQL+PHP), MAMP (macOS…), and LAMP (Linux+…). Since all of the items packaged are open-source, these installers are, most of the time, free.
```

> Whatever your operating system, you can install this *AMP stack on your operating system, or use `Docker`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whatever your operating system, you can install this *AMP stack on your operating system or use `Docker`.
```

## Which installation method is best for me?

> You basically have three options: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You have three options: 
```

> - Install an `*AMP` stack locally on your operating system, and run PrestaShop locally. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Install an `*AMP` stack locally on your operating system, and run PrestaShop there. 
```

- Install `Docker`, and run PrestaShop in containers managed by `Docker`.

> - or Install a `Virtual Machine` software, and run a `LAMP` stack in a `Virtual Machine` (not discussed here).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- or install a `Virtual Machine` software, and run a `LAMP` stack in a `Virtual Machine` (not discussed here).
```

> Depending on your experience, you will choose the method you are the most at ease with. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on your experience, you will choose the method you are most at ease with. 
```

> If you have no experience, it can be easier to begin with `Docker`, since you will not need to install the `*AMP` stack and simply install `Docker`, create a `manifest` file, and start the containers with a `CLI` (Command Line Interface) command. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have no experience, it can be easier to begin with `Docker`, since you will not need to install the `*AMP` stack and simply install `Docker`, create a `manifest` file, and start the containers with a `CLI` (Command Line Interface) command. 
```

    : Automatically installed (or manually)
  Use PrestaShop
    : You are ready to go
</div>

<a href="{{< relref "/8/basics/installation/environments/docker" >}}" class="cta cta-primary">
  Install PrestaShop locally with Docker
</a>

## Install PrestaShop locally on an *AMP stack

<div class='mermaid'>
timeline
  Setup environment: Install an *AMP stack
    : Create database
  Prepare PrestaShop installation
    : Download PrestaShop
    : Download dependencies
    : Setup file permissions
  Install PrestaShop
    : Install with GUI
    : or Install with CLI
  Use PrestaShop
    : You are ready to go
</div>

### Prerequisites

Read [System Requirements][system-requirements].

### Setup environment

#### Install an *AMP stack on your operating system

<a href="{{< relref "/8/basics/installation/environments/unix-specific" >}}" class="cta">
  Install an *AMP stack on Unix
</a>

<a href="{{< relref "/8/basics/installation/environments/windows-specific" >}}" class="cta">
  Install an *AMP stack on Windows
</a>

<a href="{{< relref "/8/basics/installation/environments/macos-specific" >}}" class="cta">
  Install an *AMP stack on MacOS
</a>

#### Creating a database for your shop

> If you are installing PrestaShop on a web server, then you must create the database and give access to a privileged user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you install PrestaShop on a web server, you must create the database and give access to a privileged user.
```

You will need this user's credentials to configure PrestaShop during the installation process.

##### Using phpMyAdmin

We assume you have root access to `phpMyAdmin`, and you're using version 4.x.

 * Sign in to `phpMyAdmin` as the root user
 * Click `User accounts`, and then click on `Add user account`
 * Fill the `User name` and the `Password`
 * In the `Database for user account`, select `Create database` and `Grant all privileges`

>  * Create user and database and make sure the COLLATION of your database is `utf8mb4_general_ci`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Create a user, database and make sure the COLLATION of your database is `utf8mb4_general_ci`
```

 
##### From the command line

The database must be created with 4-Byte UTF-8 encoding (`utf8mb4_general_ci`).

> For information on installation and configuring MySQL see the [MySQL 5.6 documentation](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.6/en/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For information on installation and configuring MySQL, see the [MySQL 5.6 documentation](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.6/en/).
```

#### Download PrestaShop

The source code of PrestaShop is hosted on the [Official PrestaShop GitHub Repository](https://github.com/PrestaShop/PrestaShop/).

You can find all the released versions of PrestaShop here: [PrestaShop releases](https://github.com/PrestaShop/PrestaShop/releases).

Nightly releases of PrestaShop are also generated daily. Their details can be found on a [public Google Cloud storage](https://console.cloud.google.com/storage/browser/prestashop-core-nightly).

##### Choose the right version for you

PrestaShop comes in two "flavors":

- **Release package**. A zip package, tuned for production environments.
- **Development version**. The raw source code as it is on the GitHub repository, including automated test suites, build scripts and source codes for assets that are otherwise compiled (like javascript and css files).

![Download files](../img/Prestashop_1.7.8.6_release.png)

{{% notice tip %}}
**Prefer cloning the repository using git for the development version.**

If you intend to work on PrestaShop itself, we suggest using Git to clone the source code of PrestaShop from the GitHub repository.
{{% /notice %}}

{{% callout %}}

##### Repository branches

> As stated above, if you decide to work on PrestaShop itself, it's best to clone the PrestaShop repository and work using git. Depending on the version of PrestaShop you want to work on, you will need to choose the right branch:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As stated above, if you decide to work on PrestaShop itself, it's best to clone the PrestaShop repository and work using Git. Depending on the version of PrestaShop you want to work on, you will need to choose the right branch:
```

> * The [develop branch](https://github.com/PrestaShop/PrestaShop/tree/8.0.x) contains the current work in progress for the next minor or major version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The [develop branch](https://github.com/PrestaShop/PrestaShop/tree/develop) contains the current work in progress for the next minor or major version.
```

>     - **This is the right branch to contribute new features, refactors, small bug fixes, etc.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **This is the right branch to contribute new features, refactors, etc.**
```

> * The maintenance branches (_8.0.x, ..._) contains all patches made for each minor version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The maintenance branches (_8.0.x, ..._) contain all patches made for each minor version.
```

    - For example, the _8.0.x_ branch contains all patches from 8.0.0 to 8.0.99.
    - Whenever a new minor or major version is ready for release, a new maintenance branch is created. For example, _8.0.x_ for version 8.0.0, _8.1.x_ for 8.1.0, and so forth.
    - **Only the most recent maintenance branch accepts new contributions**
    
{{% /callout %}}

> [Clone the repository using Git][clone-the-repository] or extract the zip package in a `prestashop` folder inside the document folder of the AMP installer you chose:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Clone the repository using Git][clone-the-repository] or extract the zip package in a `prestashop` folder inside the document folder of the *AMP installer you chose:
```

* XAMPP: `C:\xampp\htdocs` or `/Applications/xampp/htdocs`
* WampServer: `C:\wamp\www`
* EasyPHP: `C:\easyphp\www`
* MAMP: `/Applications/MAMP/htdocs/`

#### Download dependencies

{{% notice note %}}
This step is only needed if you downloaded the development version.
{{% /notice %}}

##### PHP dependencies

Use [composer][composer] to download the project's dependencies:

```bash
cd /path/to/prestashop
composer install
# or alternatively:
make composer
```

##### JavaScript and CSS dependencies

PrestaShop uses `NPM` to manage dependencies and [`Webpack`][webpack] to compile them into static assets. 

> You only need `NodeJS 14.x` (`16.x` recommended [get it here][nodejs]), NPM will take care of it all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You only need `NodeJS 14.x` (version `16.x` is recommended, [you can get it here][nodejs]), and NPM will take care of it all.
```
